# Embedding-Approximation

I introduce an adapted embedding approximation technique that allows researchers to interpret how localized speech acts contribute to biases in global embedding spaces. I validate this method by using the approximation to predict shifts in yearly embedding spaces. The methodology provides a valuable tool for projecting the embedding space back onto individual sentences. This allows researchers to dissect the complex interplay between individual speech acts and aggregate meaning structures.

I apply this approach to a substantive empirical investigation of gendered language in historical American discourse (1900-2000): words related to ``unintelligence'' (e.g., ``stupid,'' ``foolish'') and their gender realignment towards masculinity over the century \parencite{boutyline_school_2023}. Prior studies often conjecture about the contextual changes that realigned words on semantic axes, typically leaning towards stereotype hypotheses—in this case, proposing that gendered realignment of ``unintelligence'' towards the masculine pole shows an increase in stereotypical judgments about the ``stupidity'' of men. On the contrary, I discover that co-occurrence with gender-identity terms shows poor correlation with gender axis alignment, suggesting the gendering of ``unintelligence'' is not primarily driven by statements of stereotypical judgment on women and men. 

The adapted \textit{A La Carte} technique offers a systematic method for identifying the specific contexts and context words that serve as the underlying \textit{mechanisms} to structural change. By estimating the impacts of sentences and words on the gender alignment of ``unintelligence'' words, I hypothesize that context words indexing the degree of seriousness or harshness contribute significantly to the masculinization of ``unintelligence.'' I then compile lists of non-gender-identity context words categorized as ``soft'' (e.g., ``wholesome,'' ``adored,'' ``hearts'') and ``harsh'' (e.g., ``sin,'' ``evil,'' ``corrupt''), alongside same-sized lists of gender-identity words (e.g., ``he,'' ``she,'' ``man,'' ``woman,'' ``lipstick,'' ``sir''). From 1930 to 2000, the difference between ``soft'' and ``harsh'' context words correlates much better with the gender alignment of ``unintelligence'' than does the difference between female-identity and male-identity words. In other words, as descriptors of ``unintelligence'' became increasingly harsh and serious over the century, they acquired a more masculine texture in the overall embedding structure. However, this shift does not directly indicate a change in stereotypical belief, such as an increasing tendency to judge men as ``stupid.''
